
AN INQUIRY INTO THE NATURE AND CAUSES OF THE WEALTH OF NATIONS
by Adam Smith  
1776


                             BOOK THREE  

      OF THE DIFFERENT PROGRESS OF OPULENCE IN DIFFERENT NATIONS

                  Of the Natural Progress of Opulence 

     THE great commerce of every civilised society is that
carried on between the inhabitants of the town and those of the
country. It consists in the exchange of rude for manufactured
produce, either immediately, or by the intervention of money, or
of some sort of paper which represents money. The country
supplies the town with the means of subsistence and the materials
of manufacture. The town repays this supply by sending back a
part of the manufactured produce to the inhabitants of the
country. The town, in which there neither is nor can be any
reproduction of substances, may very properly be said to gain its
whole wealth and subsistence from the country. We must not,
however, upon this account, imagine that the gain of the town is
the loss of the country. The gains of both are mutual and
reciprocal, and the division of labour is in this, as in all
other cases, advantageous to all the different persons employed
in the various occupations into which it is subdivided. The
inhabitants of the country purchase of the town a greater
quantity of manufactured goods, with the produce of a much
smaller quantity of their own labour, than they must have
employed had they attempted to prepare them themselves. The town
affords a market for the surplus produce of the country, or what
is over and above the maintenance of the cultivators, and it is
there that the inhabitants of the country exchange it for
something else which is in demand among them. The greater the
number and revenue of the inhabitants of the town, the more
extensive is the market which it affords to those of the country;
and the more extensive that market, it is always the more
advantageous to a great number. The corn which grows within a
mile of the town sells there for the same price with that which
comes from twenty miles distance. But the price of the latter
must generally not only pay the expense of raising and bringing
it to market, but afford, too, the ordinary profits of
agriculture to the farmer. The proprietors and cultivators of the
country, therefore, which lies in the neighbourhood of the town,
over and above the ordinary profits of agriculture, gain, in the
price of what they sell, the whole value of the carriage of the
like produce that is brought from more distant parts, and they
have, besides, the whole value of this carriage in the price of
what they buy. Compare the cultivation of the lands in the
neighbourhood of any considerable town with that of those which
lie at some distance from it, and you will easily satisfy
yourself how much the country is benefited by the commerce of the
town. Among all the absurd speculations that have been propagated
concerning the balance of trade, it has never been pretended that
either the country loses by its commerce with the town, or the
town by that with the country which maintains it.
     As subsistence is, in the nature of things, prior to
conveniency and luxury, so the industry which procures the former
must necessarily be prior to that which ministers to the latter.
The cultivation and improvement of the country, therefore, which
affords subsistence, must, necessarily, be prior to the increase
of the town, which furnishes only the means of conveniency and
luxury. It is the surplus produce of the country only, or what is
over and above the maintenance of the cultivators, that
constitutes the subsistence of the town, which can therefore
increase only with the increase of this surplus produce. The
town, indeed, may not always derive its whole subsistence from
the country in its neighbourhood, or even from the territory to
which it belongs, but from very distant countries; and this,
though it forms no exception from the general rule, has
occasioned considerable variations in the progress of opulence in
different ages and nations.
     That order of things which necessity imposes in general,
though not in every particular country, is, in every particular
country, promoted by the natural inclinations of man. If human
institutions had never thwarted those natural inclinations, the
towns could nowhere have increased beyond what the improvement
and cultivation of the territory in which they were situated
could support; till such time, at least, as the whole of that
territory was completely cultivated and improved. Upon equal, or
nearly equal profits, most men will choose to employ their
capitals rather in the improvement and cultivation of land than
either in manufactures or in foreign trade. The man who employs
his capital in land has it more under his view and command, and
his fortune is much less liable to accidents than that of the
trader, who is obliged frequently to commit it, not only to the
winds and the waves, but to the more uncertain elements of human
folly and injustice, by giving great credits in distant countries
to men with whose character and situation he can seldom be
thoroughly acquainted. The capital of the landlord, on the
contrary, which is fixed in the improvement of his land, seems to
be as well secured as the nature of human affairs can admit of.
The beauty of the country besides, the pleasures of a country
life, the tranquillity of mind which it promises, and wherever
the injustice of human laws does not disturb it, the independency
which it really affords, have charms that more or less attract
everybody; and as to cultivate the ground was the original
destination of man, so in every stage of his existence he seems
to retain a predilection for this primitive employment.
     Without the assistance of some artificers, indeed, the
cultivation of land cannot be carried on but with great
inconveniency and continual interruption. Smiths, carpenters,
wheelwrights, and ploughwrights, masons, and bricklayers,
tanners, shoemakers, and tailors are people whose service the
farmer has frequent occasion for. Such artificers, too, stand
occasionally in need of the assistance of one another; and as
their residence is not, like that of the farmer, necessarily tied
down to a precise spot, they naturally settle in the
neighbourhood of one another, and thus form a small town or
village. The butcher, the brewer, and the baker soon join them,
together with many other artificers and retailers, necessary or
useful for supplying their occasional wants, and who contribute
still further to augment the town. The inhabitants of the town
and those of the country are mutually the servants of one
another. The town is a continual fair or market, to which the
inhabitants of the country resort in order to exchange their rude
for manufactured produce. It is this commerce which supplies the
inhabitants of the town both with the materials of their work,
and the means of their subsistence. The quantity of the finished
work which they sell to the inhabitants of the country
necessarily regulates the quantity of the materials and
provisions which they buy. Neither their employment nor
subsistence, therefore, can augment but in proportion to the
augmentation of the demand from the country for finished work;
and this demand can augment only in proportion to the extension
of improvement and cultivation. Had human institutions,
therefore, never disturbed the natural course of things, the
progressive wealth and increase of the towns would, in every
political society, be consequential, and in proportion to the
improvement and cultivation of the territory or country.
     In our North American colonies, where uncultivated land is
still to be had upon easy terms, no manufactures for distant sale
have ever yet been established in any of their towns. When an
artificer has acquired a little more stock than is necessary for
carrying on his own business in supplying the neighbouring
country, he does not, in North America, attempt to establish with
it a manufacture for more distant sale, but employs it in the
purchase and improvement of uncultivated land. From artificer he
becomes planter, and neither the large wages nor the easy
subsistence which that country affords to artificers can bribe
him rather to work for other people than for himself. He feels
that an artificer is the servant of his customers, from whom he
derives his subsistence; but that a planter who cultivates his
own land, and derives his necessary subsistence from the labour
of his own family, is really a master, and independent of all the
world.
     In countries, on the contrary, where there is either no
uncultivated land, or none that can be had upon easy terms, every
artificer who has acquired more stock than he can employ in the
occasional jobs of the neighbourhood endeavours to prepare work
for more distant sale. The smith erects some sort of iron, the
weaver some sort of linen or woollen manufactory. Those different
manufactures come, in process of time, to be gradually
subdivided, and thereby improved and refined in a great variety
of ways, which may easily be conceived, and which it is therefore
unnecessary to explain any further.
     In seeking for employment to a capital, manufactures are,
upon equal or nearly equal profits, naturally preferred to
foreign commerce, for the same reason that agriculture is
naturally preferred to manufactures. As the capital of the
landlord or farmer is more secure than that of the manufacturer,
so the capital of the manufacturer, being at all times more
within his view and command, is more secure than that of the
foreign merchant. In every period, indeed, of every society, the
surplus part both of the rude and manufactured produce, or that
for which there is no demand at home, must be sent abroad in
order to be exchanged for something for which there is some
demand at home. But whether the capital, which carries this
surplus produce abroad, be a foreign or a domestic one is of very
little importance. If the society has not acquired sufficient
capital both to cultivate all its lands, and to manufacture in
the completest manner the whole of its rude produce, there is
even a considerable advantage that rude produce should be
exported by a foreign capital, in order that the whole stock of
the society may be employed in more useful purposes. The wealth
of ancient Egypt, that of China and Indostan, sufficiently
demonstrate that a nation may attain a very high degree of
opulence though the greater part of its exportation trade be
carried on by foreigners. The progress of our North American and
West Indian colonies would have been much less rapid had no
capital but what belonged to themselves been employed in
exporting their surplus produce.
     According to the natural course of things, therefore, the
greater part of the capital of every growing society is, first,
directed to agriculture, afterwards to manufactures, and last of
all to foreign commerce. This order of things is so very natural
that in every society that had any territory it has always, I
believe, been in some degree observed. Some of their lands must
have been cultivated before any considerable towns could be
established, and some sort of coarse industry of the
manufacturing kind must have been carried on in those towns,
before they could well think of employing themselves in foreign
commerce.
     But though this natural order of things must have taken
place in some degree in every such society, it has, in all the
modern states of Europe, been, in many respects, entirely
inverted. The foreign commerce of some of their cities has
introduced all their finer manufactures, or such as were fit for
distant sale; and manufactures and foreign commerce together have
given birth to the principal improvements of agriculture. The
manners and customs which the nature of their original government
introduced, and which remained after that government was greatly
altered, necessarily forced them into this unnatural and
retrograde order.   

                            CHAPTER II

Of the Discouragement of Agriculture in the ancient State of
Europe after the Fall of the Roman Empire 

     WHEN the German and Scythian nations overran the western
provinces of the Roman empire, the confusions which followed so
great a revolution lasted for several centuries. The rapine and
violence which the barbarians exercised against the ancient
inhabitants interrupted the commerce between the towns and the
country. The towns were deserted, and the country was left
uncultivated, and the western provinces of Europe, which had
enjoyed a considerable degree of opulence under the Roman empire,
sunk into the lowest state of poverty and barbarism. During the
continuance of those confusions, the chiefs and principal leaders
of those nations acquired or usurped to themselves the greater
part of the lands of those countries. A great part of them was
uncultivated; but no part of them, whether cultivated or
uncultivated, was left without a proprietor. All of them were
engrossed, and the greater part by a few great proprietors.
     This original engrossing of uncultivated lands, though a
great, might have been but a transitory evil. They might soon
have been divided again, and broke into small parcels either by
succession or by alienation. The law of primogeniture hindered
them from being divided by succession: the introduction of
entails prevented their being broke into small parcels by
alienation.
     When land, like movables, is considered as the means only of
subsistence and enjoyment, the natural law of succession divides
it, like them, among all the children of the family; of an of
whom the subsistence and enjoyment may be supposed equally dear
to the father. This natural law of succession accordingly took
place among the Romans, who made no more distinction between
elder and younger, between male and female, in the inheritance of
lands than we do in the distribution of movables. But when land
was considered as the means, not of subsistence merely, but of
power and protection, it was thought better that it should
descend undivided to one. In those disorderly times every great
landlord was a sort of petty prince. His tenants were his
subjects. He was their judge, and in some respects their
legislator in peace, and their leader in war. He made war
according to his own discretion, frequently against his
neighbours, and sometimes against his sovereign. The security of
a landed estate, therefore, the protection which its owner could
afford to those who dwelt on it, depended upon its greatness. To
divide it was to ruin it, and to expose every part of it to be
oppressed and swallowed up by the incursions of its neighbours.
The law of primogeniture, therefore, came to take place, not
immediately, indeed, but in process of time, in the succession of
landed estates, for the same reason that it has generally taken
place in that of monarchies, though not always at their first
institution. That the power, and consequently the security of the
monarchy, may not be weakened by division, it must descend entire
to one of the children. To which of them so important a
preference shall be given must be determined by some general
rule, founded not upon the doubtful distinctions of personal
merit, but upon some plain and evident difference which can admit
of no dispute. Among the children of the same family, there can
be no indisputable difference but that of sex, and that of age.
The male sex is universally preferred to the female; and when all
other things are equal, the elder everywhere takes place of the
younger. Hence the origin of the right of primogeniture, and of
what is called lineal succession.
     Laws frequently continue in force long after the
circumstances which first gave occasion to them, and which could
alone render them reasonable, are no more. In the present state
of Europe, the proprietor of a single acre of land is as
perfectly secure of his possession as the proprietor of a hundred
thousand. The right of primogeniture, however, still continues to
be respected, and as of all institutions it is the fittest to
support the pride of family distinctions, it is still likely to
endure for many centuries. In every other respect, nothing can be
more contrary to the real interest of a numerous family than a
right which, in order to enrich one, beggars all the rest of the
children.
     Entails are the natural consequences of the law of
primogeniture. They were introduced to preserve a certain lineal
succession, of which the law of primogeniture first gave the
idea, and to hinder any part of the original estate from being
carried out of the proposed line either by gift, or devise, or
alienation; either by the folly, or by the misfortune of any of
its successive owners. They were altogether unknown to the
Romans. Neither their substitutions nor fideicommisses bear any
resemblance to entails, though some French lawyers have thought
proper to dress the modern institution in the language and garb
of those ancient ones.
     When great landed estates were a sort of principalities,
entails might not be unreasonable. Like what are called the
fundamental laws of some monarchies, they might frequently hinder
the security of thousands from being endangered by the caprice or
extravagance of one man. But in the present state of Europe, when
small as well as great estates derive their security from the
laws of their country, nothing can be more completely absurd.
They are founded upon the most absurd of all suppositions, the
supposition that every successive generation of men have not an
equal right to the earth, and to all that it possesses; but that
the property of the present generation should be restrained and
regulated according to the fancy of those who died perhaps five
hundred years ago. Entails, however, are still respected through
the greater part of Europe, in those countries particularly in
which noble birth is a necessary qualification for the enjoyment
either of civil or military honours. Entails are thought
necessary for maintaining this exclusive privilege of the
nobility to the great offices and honours of their country; and
that order having usurped one unjust advantage over the rest of
their fellow citizens, lest their poverty should render it
ridiculous, it is thought reasonable that they should have
another. The common law of England, indeed, is said to abhor
perpetuities, and they are accordingly more restricted there than
in any other European monarchy; though even England is not
altogether without them. In Scotland more than one-fifth, perhaps
more than one-third, part of the whole lands of the country are
at present supposed to be under strict entail.
     Great tracts of uncultivated land were, in this manner, not
only engrossed by particular families, but the possibility of
their being divided again was as much as possible precluded for
ever. It seldom happens, however, that a great proprietor is a
great improver. In the disorderly times which gave birth to those
barbarous institutions, the great proprietor was sufficiently
employed in defending his own territories, or in extending his
jurisdiction and authority over those of his neighbours. He had
no leisure to attend to the cultivation and improvement of land.
When the establishment of law and order afforded him this
leisure, he often wanted the inclination, and almost always the
requisite abilities. If the expense of his house and person
either equalled or exceeded his revenue, as it did very
frequently, he had no stock to employ in this manner. If he was
an economist, he generally found it more profitable to employ his
annual savings in new purchases than in the improvement of his
old estate. To improve land with profit, like all other
commercial projects, requires an exact attention to small savings
and small gains, of which a man born to a great fortune, even
though naturally frugal, is very seldom capable. The situation of
such a person naturally disposes him to attend rather to ornament
which pleases his fancy than to profit for which he has so little
occasion. The elegance of his dress, of his equipage, of his
house, and household furniture, are objects which from his
infancy he has been accustomed to have some anxiety about. The
turn of mind which this habit naturally forms follows him when he
comes to think of the improvement of land. He embellishes perhaps
four or five hundred acres in the neighbourhood of his house, at
ten times the expense which the land is worth after all his
improvements; and finds that if he was to improve his whole
estate in the same manner, and he has little taste for any other,
he would be a bankrupt before he had finished the tenth part of
it. There still remain in both parts of the United Kingdom some
great estates which have continued without interruption in the
hands of the same family since the times of feudal anarchy.
Compare the present condition of those estates with the
possessions of the small proprietors in their neighbourhood, and
you will require no other argument to convince you how
unfavourable such extensive property is to improvement.
     If little improvement was to be expected from such great
proprietors, still less was to be hoped for from those who
occupied the land under them. In the ancient state of Europe, the
occupiers of land were all tenants at will. They were all or
almost all slaves; but their slavery was of a milder kind than
that known among the ancient Greeks and Romans, or even in our
West Indian colonies. They were supposed to belong more directly
to the land than to their master. They could, therefore, be sold
with it, but not separately. They could marry, provided it was
with the consent of their master; and he could not afterwards
dissolve the marriage by selling the man and wife to different
persons. If he maimed or murdered any of them, he was liable to
some penalty, though generally but to a small one. They were not,
however, capable of acquiring property. Whatever they acquired
was acquired to their master, and he could take it from them at
pleasure. Whatever cultivation and improvement could be carried
on by means of such slaves was properly carried on by their
master. It was at his expense. The seed, the cattle, and the
instruments of husbandry were all his. It was for his benefit.
Such slaves could acquire nothing but their daily maintenance. It
was properly the proprietor himself, therefore, that, in this
case, occupied his own lands, and cultivated them by his own
bondmen. This species of slavery still subsists in Russia,
Poland, Hungary, Bohemia, Moravia, and other parts of Germany. It
is only in the western and southwestern provinces of Europe that
it has gradually been abolished altogether.
     But if great improvements are seldom to be expected from
great proprietors, they are least of all to be expected when they
employ slaves for their workmen. The experience of all ages and
nations, I believe, demonstrates that the work done by slaves,
though it appears to cost only their maintenance, is in the end
the dearest of any. A person who can acquire no property, can
have no other interest but to eat as much, and to labour as
little as possible. Whatever work he does beyond what is
sufficient to purchase his own maintenance can be squeezed out of
him by violence only, and not by any interest of his own. In
ancient Italy, how much the cultivation of corn degenerated, how
unprofitable it became to the master when it fell under the
management of slaves, is remarked by both Pliny and Columella. In
the time of Aristotle it had not been much better in ancient
Greece. Speaking of the ideal republic described in the laws of
Plato, to maintain five thousand idle men (the number of warriors
supposed necessary for its defence) together with their women and
servants, would require, he says, a territory of boundless extent
and fertility, like the plains of Babylon.
     The pride of man makes him love to domineer, and nothing
mortifies him so much as to be obliged to condescend to persuade
his inferiors. Wherever the law allows it, and the nature of the
work can afford it, therefore, he will generally prefer the
service of slaves to that of freemen. The planting of sugar and
tobacco can afford the expense of slave-cultivation. The raising
of corn, it seems, in the present times, cannot. In the English
colonies, of which the principal produce is corn, the far greater
part of the work is done by freemen. The late resolution of the
Quakers in Pennsylvania to set at liberty all their negro slaves
may satisfy us that their number cannot be very great. Had they
made any considerable part of their property, such a resolution
could never have been agreed to. In our sugar colonies, on the
contrary, the whole work is done by slaves, and in our tobacco
colonies a very great part of it. The profits of a
sugar-plantation in any of our West Indian colonies are generally
much greater than those of any other cultivation that is known
either in Europe or America; and the profits of a tobacco
plantation, though inferior to those of sugar, are superior to
those of corn, as has already been observed. Both can afford the
expense of slave-cultivation, but sugar can afford it still
better than tobacco. The number of negroes accordingly is much
greater, in proportion to that of whites, in our sugar than in
our tobacco colonies.
     To the slave cultivators of ancient times gradually
succeeded a species of farmers known at present in France by the
name of metayers. They are called in Latin, Coloni partiarii.
They have been so long in disuse in England that at present I
know no English name for them. The proprietor furnished them with
the seed, cattle, and instruments of husbandry, the whole stock,
in short, necessary for cultivating the farm. The produce was
divided equally between the proprietor and the farmer, after
setting aside what was judged necessary for keeping up the stock,
which was restored to the proprietor when the farmer either
quitted, or was turned out of the farm.
     Land occupied by such tenants is properly cultivated at the
expense of the proprietor as much as that occupied by slaves.
There is, however, one very essential difference between them.
Such tenants, being freemen, are capable of acquiring property,
and having a certain proportion of the produce of the land, they
have a plain interest that the whole produce should be as great
as possible, in order that their own proportion may be so. A
slave, on the contrary, who can acquire nothing but his
maintenance, consults his own ease by making the land produce as
little as possible over and above that maintenance. It is
probable that it was partly upon account of this advantage, and
partly upon account of the encroachments which the sovereign,
always jealous of the great lords, gradually encouraged their
villains to make upon their authority, and which seem at last to
have been such as rendered this species of servitude altogether
inconvenient, that tenure in villanage gradually wore out through
the greater part of Europe. The time and manner, however, in
which so important a revolution was brought about is one of the
most obscure points in modern history. The Church of Rome claims
great merit in it; and it is certain that so early as the twelfth
century, Alexander III published a bull for the general
emancipation of slaves. It seems, however, to have been rather a
pious exhortation than a law to which exact obedience was
required from the faithful. Slavery continued to take place
almost universally for several centuries afterwards, till it was
gradually abolished by the joint operation of the two interests
above mentioned, that of the proprietor on the one hand, and that
of the sovereign on the other. A villain enfranchised, and at the
same time allowed to continue in possession of the land, having
no stock of his own, could cultivate it only by means of what the
landlord advanced to him, and must, therefore, have been what the
French called a metayer.
     It could never, however, be the interest even of this last
species of cultivators to lay out, in the further improvement of
the land, any part of the little stock which they might save from
their own share of the produce, because the lord, who laid out
nothing, was to get one half of whatever it produced. The tithe,
which is but a tenth of the produce, is found to be a very great
hindrance to improvement. A tax, therefore, which amounted to one
half must have been an effectual bar to it. It might be the
interest of a metayer to make the land produce as much as could
be brought out of it by means of the stock furnished by the
proprietor; but it could never be his interest to mix any part of
his own with it. In France, where five parts out of six of the
whole kingdom are said to be still occupied by this species of
cultivators, the proprietors complain that their metayers take
every opportunity of employing the master's cattle rather in
carriage than in cultivation; because in the one case they get
the whole profits to themselves, in the other they share them
with their landlord. This species of tenants still subsists in
some parts of Scotland. They are called steel-bow tenants. Those
ancient English tenants, who are said by Chief Baron Gilbert and
Doctor Blackstone to have been rather bailiffs of the landlord
than farmers properly so called, were probably of the same kind.
     To this species of tenancy succeeded, though by very slow
degrees, farmers properly so called, who cultivated the land with
their own stock, paying a rent certain to the landlord. When such
farmers have a lease for a term of years, they may sometimes find
it for their interest to lay out part of their capital in the
further improvement of the farm; because they may sometimes
expect to recover it, with a large profit, before the expiration
of the lease. The possession even of such farmers, however, was
long extremely precarious, and still is so in many parts of
Europe. They could before the expiration of their term be legally
outed of their lease by a new purchaser; in England, even by the
fictitious action of a common recovery. If they were turned out
illegally by the violence of their master, the action by which
they obtained redress was extremely imperfect. It did not always
reinstate them in the possession of the land, but gave them
damages which never amounted to the real loss. Even in England,
the country perhaps of Europe where the yeomanry has always been
most respected, it was not till about the 14th of Henry VII that
the action of ejectment was invented, by which the tenant
recovers, not damages only but possession, and in which his claim
is not necessarily concluded by the uncertain decision of a
single assize. This action has been found so effectual a remedy
that, in the modern practice, when the landlord has occasion to
sue for the possession of the land, he seldom makes use of the
actions which properly belong to him as landlord, the Writ of
Right or the Writ of Entry, but sues in the name of his tenant by
the Writ of Ejectment. In England, therefore, the security of the
tenant is equal to that of the proprietor. In England, besides, a
lease for life of forty shillings a year value is a freehold, and
entitles the lessee to vote for a Member of Parliament; and as a
great part of the yeomanry have freeholds of this kind, the whole
order becomes respectable to their landlords on account of the
political consideration which this gives them. There is, I
believe, nowhere in Europe, except in England, any instance of
the tenant building upon the land of which he had no lease, and
trusting that the honour of his landlord would take no advantage
of so important an improvement. Those laws and customs so
favourable to the yeomanry have perhaps contributed more to the
present grandeur of England than all their boasted regulations of
commerce taken together.
     The law which secures the longest leases against successors
of every kind is, so far as I know, peculiar to Great Britain. It
was introduced into Scotland so early as 1449, a law of James II.
Its beneficial influence, however, has been much obstructed by
entails; the heirs of entail being generally restrained from
letting leases for any long term of years, frequently for more
than one year. A late Act of Parliament has, in this respect,
somewhat slackened their fetters, though they are still by much
too strait. In Scotland, besides, as no leasehold gives a vote
for a Member of Parliament, the yeomanry are upon this account
less respectable to their landlords than in England.
     In other parts of Europe, after it was found convenient to
secure tenants both against heirs and purchasers, the term of
their security was still limited to a very short period; in
France, for example, to nine years from the commencement of the
lease. It has in that country, indeed, been lately extended to
twenty-seven, a period still too short to encourage the tenant to
make the most important improvements. The proprietors of land
were anciently the legislators of every part of Europe. The laws
relating to land, therefore, were all calculated for what they
supposed the interest of the proprietor. It was for his interest,
they had imagined, that no lease granted by any of his
predecessors should hinder him from enjoying, during a long term
of years, the full value of his land. Avarice and injustice are
always short-sighted, and they did not foresee how much this
regulation must obstruct improvement, and thereby hurt in the
long-run the real interest of the landlord.
     The farmers too, besides paying the rent, were anciently, it
was supposed, bound to perform a great number of services to the
landlord, which were seldom either specified in the lease, or
regulated by any precise rule, but by the use and wont of the
manor or barony. These services, therefore, being almost entirely
arbitrary, subjected the tenant to many vexations. In Scotland
the abolition of all services not precisely stipulated in the
lease has in the course of a few years very much altered for the
better the condition of the yeomanry of that country.
     The public services to which the yeomanry were bound were
not less arbitrary than the private ones. To make and maintain
the high roads, a servitude which still subsists, I believe,
everywhere, though with different degrees of oppression in
different countries, was not the only one. When the king's
troops, when his household or his officers of any kind passed
through any part of the country, the yeomanry were bound to
provide them with horses, carriages, and provisions, at a price
regulated by the purveyor. Great Britain is, I believe, the only
monarchy in Europe where the oppression of purveyance has been
entirely abolished. It still subsists in France and Germany.
     The public taxes to which they were subject were as
irregular and oppressive as the services. The ancient lords,
though extremely unwilling to grant themselves any pecuniary aid
to their sovereign, easily allowed him to tallage, as they called
it their tenants, and had not knowledge enough to foresee how
much this must in the end affect their own revenue. The taille,
as it still subsists in France, may serve as an example of those
ancient tallages. It is a tax upon the supposed profits of the
farmer, which they estimate by the stock that he has upon the
farm. It is his interest, therefore, to appear to have as little
as possible, and consequently to employ as little as possible in
its cultivation, and none in its improvement. Should any stock
happen to accumulate in the hands of a French farmer, the taille
is almost equal to a prohibition of its ever being employed upon
the land. This tax, besides, is supposed to dishonour whoever is
subject to it, and to degrade him below, not only the rank of a
gentleman, but that of a burgher, and whoever rents the lands of
another becomes subject to it. No gentleman, nor even any burgher
who has stock, will submit to this degradation. This tax,
therefore, not only hinders the stock which accumulates upon the
land from being employed in its improvement, but drives away an
other stock from it. The ancient tenths and fifteenths, so usual
in England in former times, seem, so far as they affected the
land, to have been taxes of the same nature with the taille.
     Under all these discouragements, little improvement could be
expected from the occupiers of land. That order of people, with
all the liberty and security which law can give, must always
improve under great disadvantages. The farmer, compared with the
proprietor, is as a merchant who trades with borrowed money
compared with one who trades with his own. The stock of both may
improve, but that of the one, with only equal good conduct, must
always improve more slowly than that of the other, on account of
the large share of the profits which is consumed by the interest
of the loan. The lands cultivated by the farmer must, in the same
manner, with only equal good conduct, be improved more slowly
than those cultivated by the proprietor, on account of the large
share of the produce which is consumed in the rent, and which,
had the farmer been proprietor, he might have employed in the
further improvement of the land. The station of a farmer besides
is, from the nature of things, inferior to that of a proprietor.
Through the greater part of Europe the yeomanry are regarded as
an inferior rank of people, even to the better sort of tradesmen
and mechanics, and in all parts of Europe to the great merchants
and master manufacturers. It can seldom happen, therefore, that a
man of any considerable stock should quit the superior in order
to place himself in an inferior station. Even in the present
state of Europe, therefore, little stock is likely to go from any
other profession to the improvement of land in the way of
farming. More does perhaps in Great Britain than in any other
country, though even there the great stocks which are, in some
places, employed in farming have generally been acquired by
farming, the trade, perhaps, in which of all others stock is
commonly acquired most slowly. After small proprietors, however,
rich and great farmers are, in every country, the principal
improvers. There are more such perhaps in England than in any
other European monarchy. In the republican governments of Holland
and of Berne in Switzerland, the farmers are said to be not
inferior to those of England.
     The ancient policy of Europe was, over and above all this,
unfavourable to the improvement and cultivation of land, whether
carried on by the proprietor or by the farmer; first, by the
general prohibition of the exportation of corn without a special
licence, which seems to have been a very universal regulation;
and secondly, by the restraints which were laid upon the inland
commerce, not only of corn, but of almost every other part of the
produce of the farm by the absurd laws against engrossers,
regrators, and forestallers, and by the privileges of fairs and
markets. It has already been observed in what manner the
prohibition of the exportation of corn, together with some
encouragement given to the importation of foreign corn,
obstructed the cultivation of ancient Italy, naturally the most
fertile country in Europe, and at that time the seat of the
greatest empire in the world. To what degree such restraints upon
the inland commerce of this commodity, joined to the general
prohibition of exportation, must have discouraged the cultivation
of countries less fertile and less favourably circumstanced, it
is not perhaps very easy to imagine.   

                          CHAPTER III
Of the Rise and Progress of Cities and Towns after the Fall of
the Roman Empire 


     THE inhabitants of cities and towns were, after the fall of
the Roman empire, not more favoured than those of the country.
They consisted, indeed, of a very different order of people from
the first inhabitants of the ancient republics of Greece and
Italy. These last were composed chiefly of the proprietors of
lands, among whom the public territory was originally divided,
and who found it convenient to build their houses in the
neighbourhood of one another, and to surround them with a wall,
for the sake of common defence. After the fall of the Roman
empire, on the contrary, the proprietors of land seem generally
to have lived in fortified castles on their own estates, and in
the midst of their own tenants and dependants. The towns were
chiefly inhabited by tradesmen and mechanics, who seem in those
days to have been of servile, or very nearly of servile
condition. The privileges which we find granted by ancient
charters to the inhabitants of some of the principal towns in
Europe sufficiently show what they were before those grants. The
people to whom it is granted as a privilege that they might give
away their own daughters in marriage without the consent of their
lord, that upon their death their own children, and not their
lord, should succeed to their goods, and that they might dispose
of their own effects by will, must, before those grants, have
been either altogether or very nearly in the same state of
villanage with the occupiers of land in the country.
     They seem, indeed, to have been a very poor, mean set of
people, who used to travel about with their goods from place to
place, and from fair to fair, like the hawkers and pedlars of the
present times. In all the different countries of Europe then, in
the same manner as in several of the Tartar governments of Asia
at present, taxes used to be levied upon the persons and goods of
travellers when they passed through certain manors, when they
went over certain bridges, when they carried about their goods
from place to place in a fair, when they erected in it a booth or
stall to sell them in. These different taxes were known in
England by the names of passage, pontage, lastage, and stallage.
Sometimes the king, sometimes a great lord, who had, it seems,
upon some occasions, authority to do this, would grant to
particular traders, to such particularly as lived in their own
demesnes, a general exemption from such taxes. Such traders,
though in other respects of servile, or very nearly of servile
condition, were upon this account called free-traders. They in
return usually paid to their protector a sort of annual poll-tax.
In those days protection was seldom granted without a valuable
consideration, and this tax might, perhaps, be considered as
compensation for what their patrons might lose by their exemption
from other taxes. At first, both those poll-taxes and those
exemptions seem to have been altogether personal, and to have
affected only particular individuals during either their lives or
the pleasure of their protectors. In the very imperfect accounts
which have been published from Domesday Book of several of the
towns of England, mention is frequently made sometimes of the tax
which particular burghers paid, each of them, either to the king
or to some other great lord for this sort of protection; and
sometimes of the general amount only of all those taxes.
     But how servile soever may have been originally the
condition of the inhabitants of the towns, it appears evidently
that they arrived at liberty and independency much earlier than
the occupiers of land in the country. That part of the king's
revenue which arose from such poll-taxes in any particular town
used commonly to be let in farm during a term of years for a rent
certain, sometimes to the sheriff of the county, and sometimes to
other persons. The burghers themselves frequently got credit
enough to be admitted to farm the revenues of this sort which
arose out of their own town, they becoming jointly and severally
answerable for the whole rent. To let a farm in this manner was
quite agreeable to the usual economy of, I believe, the
sovereigns of all the different countries of Europe, who used
frequently to let whole manors to all the tenants of those
manors, they becoming jointly and severally answerable for the
whole rent; but in return being allowed to collect it in their
own way, and to pay it into the king's exchequer by the hands of
their own bailiff, and being thus altogether freed from the
insolence of the king's officers- a circumstance in those days
regarded as of the greatest importance.
     At first the farm of the town was probably let to the
burghers, in the same manner as it had been to other farmers, for
a term of years only. In process of time, however, it seems to
have become the general practice to grant it to them in fee, that
is for ever, reserving a rent certain never afterwards to be
augmented. The payment having thus become perpetual, the
exemptions, in return for which it was made, naturally became
perpetual too. Those exemptions, therefore, ceased to be
personal, and could not afterwards be considered as belonging to
individuals as individuals, but as burghers of a particular
burgh, which, upon this account, was called a free burgh, for the
same reason that they had been called free burghers or free
traders.
     Along with this grant, the important privileges above
mentioned, that they might give away their own daughters in
marriage, that their children should succeed to them, and that
they might dispose of their own effects by will, were generally
bestowed upon the burghers of the town to whom it was given.
Whether such privileges had before been usually granted along
with the freedom of trade to particular burghers, as individuals,
I know not. I reckon it not improbable that they were, though I
cannot produce any direct evidence of it. But however this may
have been, the principal attributes of villanage and slavery
being thus taken away from them, they now, at least, became
really free in our present sense of the word Freedom.
     Nor was this all. They were generally at the same time
erected into a commonalty or corporation, with the privilege of
having magistrates and a town council of their own, of making
bye-laws for their own government, of building walls for their
own defence, and of reducing all their inhabitants under a sort
of military discipline by obliging them to watch and ward, that
is, as anciently understood, to guard and defend those walls
against all attacks and surprises by night as well as by day. In
England they were generally exempted from suit to the hundred and
county courts; and all such pleas as should arise among them, the
pleas of the crown excepted, were left to the decision of their
own magistrates. In other countries much greater and more
extensive jurisdictions were frequently granted to them.
     It might, probably, be necessary to grant to such towns as
were admitted to farm their own revenues some sort of compulsive
jurisdiction to oblige their own citizens to make payment. In
those disorderly times it might have been extremely inconvenient
to have left them to seek this sort of justice from any other
tribunal. But it must seem extraordinary that the sovereigns of
all the different countries of Europe should have exchanged in
this manner for a rent certain, never more to be augmented, that
branch of the revenue which was, perhaps, of all others the most
likely to be improved by the natural course of things, without
either expense or attention of their own: and that they should,
besides, have in this manner voluntarily erected a sort of
independent republics in the heart of their own dominions.
     In order to understand this, it must be remembered that in
those days the sovereign of perhaps no country in Europe was able
to protect, through the whole extent of his dominions, the weaker
part of his subjects from the oppression of the great lords.
Those whom the law could not protect, and who were not strong
enough to defend themselves, were obliged either to have recourse
to the protection of some great lord, and in order to obtain it
to become either his slaves or vassals; or to enter into a league
of mutual defence for the common protection of one another. The
inhabitants of cities and burghs, considered as single
individuals, had no power to defend themselves; but by entering
into a league of mutual defence with their neighbours, they were
capable of making no contemptible resistance. The lords despised
the burghers, whom they considered not only as of a different
order, but as a parcel of emancipated slaves, almost of a
different species from themselves. The wealth of the burghers
never failed to provoke their envy and indignation, and they
plundered them upon every occasion without mercy or remorse. The
burghers naturally hated and feared the lords. The king hated and
feared them too; but though perhaps he might despise, he had no
reason either to hate or fear the burghers. Mutual interest,
therefore, disposed them to support the king, and the king to
support them against the lords. They were the enemies of his
enemies, and it was his interest to render them as secure and
independent of those enemies as he could. By granting them
magistrates of their own, the privilege of making bye-laws for
their own government, that of building walls for their own
defence, and that of reducing all their inhabitants under a sort
of military discipline, he gave them all the means of security
and independency of the barons which it was in his power to
bestow. Without the establishment of some regular government of
this kind, without some authority to compel their inhabitants to
act according to some certain plan or system, no voluntary league
of mutual defence could either have afforded them any permanent
security, or have enabled them to give the king any considerable
support. By granting them the farm of their town in fee, he took
away from those whom he wished to have for his friends, and, if
one may say so, for his allies, all ground of jealousy and
suspicion that he was ever afterwards to oppress them, either by
raising the farm rent of their town or by granting it to some
other farmer.
     The princes who lived upon the worst terms with their barons
seem accordingly to have been the most liberal in grants of this
kind to their burghs. King John of England, for example, appears
to have been a most munificent benefactor to his towns. Philip
the First of France lost all authority over his barons. Towards
the end of his reign, his son Lewis, known afterwards by the name
of Lewis the Fat, consulted, according to Father Daniel, with the
bishops of the royal demesnes concerning the most proper means of
restraining the violence of the great lords. Their advice
consisted of two different proposals. One was to erect a new
order of jurisdiction, by establishing magistrates and a town
council in every considerable town of his demesnes. The other was
to form a new militia, by making the inhabitants of those towns,
under the command of their own magistrates, march out upon proper
occasions to the assistance of the king. It is from this period,
according to the French antiquarians, that we are to date the
institution of the magistrates and councils of cities in France.
It was during the unprosperous reigns of the princes of the house
of Suabia that the greater part of the free towns of Germany
received the first grants of their privileges, and that the
famous Hanseatic league first became formidable.
     The militia of the cities seems, in those times, not to have
been inferior to that of the country, and as they could be more
readily assembled upon any sudden occasion, they frequently had
the advantage in their disputes with the neighbouring lords. In
countries, such as Italy and Switzerland, in which, on account
either of their distance from the principal seat of government,
of the natural strength of the country itself, or of some other
reason, the sovereign came to lose the whole of his authority,
the cities generally became independent republics, and conquered
all the nobility in their neighbourhood, obliging them to pull
down their castles in the country and to live, like other
peaceable inhabitants, in the city. This is the short history of
the republic of Berne as well as of several other cities in
Switzerland. If you except Venice, for of that city the history
is somewhat different, it is the history of all the considerable
Italian republics, of which so great a number arose and perished
between the end of the twelfth and the beginning of the sixteenth
century.
     In countries such as France or England, where the authority
of the sovereign, though frequently very low, never was destroyed
altogether, the cities had no opportunity of becoming entirely
independent. They became, however, so considerable that the
sovereign could impose no tax upon them, besides the stated
farm-rent of the town, without their own consent. They were,
therefore, called upon to send deputies to the general assembly
of the states of the kingdom, where they might join with the
clergy and the barons in granting, upon urgent occasions, some
extraordinary aid to the king. Being generally, too, more
favourable to his power, their deputies seem, sometimes, to have
been employed by him as a counterbalance in those assemblies to
the authority of the great lords. Hence the origin of the
representation of burghs in the states-general of all the great
monarchies in Europe.
     Order and good government, and along with them the liberty
and security of individuals, were, in this manner, established in
cities at a time when the occupiers of land in the country were
exposed to every sort of violence. But men in this defenceless
state naturally content themselves with their necessary
subsistence, because to acquire more might only tempt the
injustice of their oppressors. On the contrary, when they are
secure of enjoying the fruits of their industry, they naturally
exert it to better their condition, and to acquire not only the
necessaries, but the conveniences and elegancies of life. That
industry, therefore, which aims at something more than necessary
subsistence, was established in cities long before it was
commonly practised by the occupiers of land in the country. If in
the hands of a poor cultivator, oppressed with the servitude of
villanage, some little stock should accumulate, he would
naturally conceal it with great care from his master, to whom it
would otherwise have belonged, and take the first opportunity of
running away to a town. The law was at that time so indulgent to
the inhabitants of towns, and so desirous of diminishing the
authority of the lords over those of the country, that if he
could conceal himself there from the pursuit of his lord for a
year, he was free for ever. Whatever stock, therefore,
accumulated in the hands of the industrious part of the
inhabitants of the country naturally took refuge in cities as the
only sanctuaries in which it could be secure to the person that
acquired it.
     The inhabitants of a city, it is true, must always
ultimately derive their subsistence, and the whole materials and
means of their industry, from the country. But those of a city,
situated near either the sea coast or the banks of a navigable
river, are not necessarily confined to derive them from the
country in their neighbourhood. They have a much wider range, and
may draw them from the most remote corners of the world, either
in exchange for the manufactured produce of their own industry,
or by performing the office of carriers between distant countries
and exchanging the produce of one for that of another. A city
might in this manner grow up to great wealth and splendour, while
not only the country in its neighbourhood, but all those to which
it traded, were in poverty and wretchedness. Each of those
countries, perhaps, taken singly, could afford it but a small
part either of its subsistence or of its employment, but all of
them taken together could afford it both a great subsistence and
a great employment. There were, however, within the narrow circle
of the commerce of those times, some countries that were opulent
and industrious. Such was the Greek empire as long as it
subsisted, and that of the Saracens during the reigns of the
Abassides. Such too was Egypt till it was conquered by the Turks,
some part of the coast of Barbary, and all those provinces of
Spain which were under the government of the Moors.
     The cities of Italy seem to have been the first in Europe
which were raised by commerce to any considerable degree of
opulence. Italy lay in the centre of what was at that time the
improved and civilised part of the world. The Crusades too,
though by the great waste of stock and destruction of inhabitants
which they occasioned they must necessarily have retarded the
progress of the greater part of Europe, were extremely favourable
to that of some Italian cities. The great armies which marched
from all parts to the conquest of the Holy Land gave
extraordinary encouragement to the shipping of Venice, Genoa, and
Pisa, sometimes in transporting them thither, and always in
supplying them with provisions. They were the commissaries, if
one may say so, of those armies; and the most destructive frenzy
that ever befell the European nations was a source of opulence to
those republics.
     The inhabitants of trading cities, by importing the improved
manufactures and expensive luxuries of richer countries, afforded
some food to the vanity of the great proprietors, who eagerly
purchased them with great quantities of the rude produce of their
own lands. The commerce of a great part of Europe in those times,
accordingly, consisted chiefly in the exchange of their own rude
for the, manufactured produce of more civilised nations. Thus the
wool of England used to be exchanged for the wines of France and
the fine cloths of Flanders, in the same manner as the corn in
Poland is at this day exchanged for the wines and brandies of
France and for the silks and velvets of France and Italy.
     A taste for the finer and more improved manufactures was in
this manner introduced by foreign commerce into countries where
no such works were carried on. But when this taste became so
general as to occasion a considerable demand, the merchants, in
order to save the expense of carriage, naturally endeavoured to
establish some manufactures of the same kind in their own
country. Hence the origin of the first manufactures for distant
sale that seem to have been established in the western provinces
of Europe after the fall of the Roman empire. No large country,
it must be observed, ever did or could subsist without some sort
of manufactures being carried on in it; and when it is said of
any such country that it has no manufactures, it must always be
understood of the finer and more improved or of such as are fit
for distant sale. In every large country both the clothing and
household furniture of the far greater part of the people are the
produce of their own industry. This is even more universally the
case in those poor countries which are commonly said to have no
manufactures than in those rich ones that are said to abound in
them. In the latter, you will generally find, both in the clothes
and household furniture of the lowest rank of people, a much
greater proportion of foreign productions than in the former.
     Those manufactures which are fit for distant sale seem to
have been introduced into different countries in two different
ways.
     Sometimes they have been introduced, in the manner above
mentioned, by the violent operation, if one may say so, of the
stocks of particular merchants and undertakers, who established
them in imitation of some foreign manufactures of the same kind.
Such manufactures, therefore, are the offspring of foreign
commerce, and such seem to have been the ancient manufactures of
silks, velvets, and brocades, which flourished in Lucca during
the thirteenth century. They were banished from thence by the
tyranny of one of Machiavel's heroes, Castruccio Castracani. In
1310, nine hundred families were driven out of Lucca, of whom
thirty-one retired to Venice and offered to introduce there the
silk manufacture. Their offer was accepted; many privileges were
conferred upon them, and they began the manufacture with three
hundred workmen. Such, too, seem to have been the manufactures of
fine cloths that anciently flourished in Flanders, and which were
introduced into England in the beginning of the reign of
Elizabeth; and such are the present silk manufactures of Lyons
and Spitalfields. Manufactures introduced in this manner are
generally employed upon foreign materials, being imitations of
foreign manufactures. When the Venetian manufacture was first
established, the materials were all brought from Sicily and the
Levant. The more ancient manufacture of Lucca was likewise
carried on with foreign materials. The cultivation of mulberry
trees and the breeding of silk-worms seem not to have been common
in the northern parts of Italy before the sixteenth century.
Those arts were not introduced into France till the reign of
Charles IX. The manufactures of Flanders were carried on chiefly
with Spanish and English wool. Spanish wool was the material, not
of the first woollen manufacture of England, but of the first
that was fit for distant sale. More than one half the materials
of the Lyons manufacture is at this day, foreign silk; when it
was first established, the whole or very nearly the whole was so.
No part of the materials of the Spitalfields manufacture is ever
likely be the produce of England. The seat of such manufactures,
as they are generally introduced by the scheme and project of a
few individuals, is sometimes established in a maritime city, and
sometimes in an inland town, according as their interest,
judgment, or caprice happen to determine.
     At other times, manufactures for distant sale group up
naturally, and as it were of their own accord, by the gradual
refinement of those household and coarser manufactures which must
at all times be carried on even in the poorest and rudest
countries. Such manufactures are generally employed upon the
materials which the country produces, and they seem frequently to
have been first refined and improved in such inland countries as
were, not indeed at a very great, but at a considerable distance
from the sea coast, and sometimes even from all water carriage.
An inland country, naturally fertile and easily cultivated,
produces a great surplus of provisions beyond what is necessary
for maintaining the cultivators, and on account of the expense of
land carriage, and inconveniency of river navigation, it may
frequently be difficult to send this surplus abroad. Abundance,
therefore, renders provisions cheap, and encourages a great
number of workmen to settle in the neighbourhood, who find that
their industry can there procure them more of the necessaries and
conveniencies of life than in other places. They work up the
materials of manufacture which the land produces, and exchange
their finished work, or what is the same thing the price of it,
for more materials and provisions. They give a new value to the
surplus part of the rude produce by saving the expense of
carrying it to the water side or to some distant market; and they
furnish the cultivators with something in exchange for it that is
either useful or agreeable to them upon easier terms than they
could have obtained it before. The cultivators get a better price
for their surplus produce, and can purchase cheaper other
conveniences which they have occasion for. They are thus both
encouraged and enabled to increase this surplus produce by a
further improvement and better cultivation of the land; and as
the fertility of the land had given birth to the manufacture, so
the progress of the manufacture reacts upon the land and
increases still further its fertility. The manufacturers first
supply the neighbourhood, and afterwards, as their work improves
and refines, more distant markets. For though neither the rude
produce nor even the coarse manufacture could, without the
greatest difficulty, support the expense of a considerable land
carriage, the refined and improved manufacture easily may. In a
small bulk it frequently contains the price of a great quantity
of rude produce. A piece of fine cloth, for example, which weighs
only eighty pounds, contains in it, the price, not only of eighty
pounds' weight of wool, but sometimes of several thousand weight
of corn, the maintenance of the different working people and of
their immediate employers. The corn, which could with difficulty
have been carried abroad in its own shape, is in this manner
virtually exported in that of the complete manufacture, and may
easily be sent to the remotest corners of the world. In this
manner have grown up naturally, and as it were of their own
accord, the manufactures of Leeds, Halifax, Sheffield,
Birmingham, and Wolverhampton. Such manufactures are the
offspring of agriculture. In the modern history of Europe, their
extension and improvement have generally been posterior to those
which were the offspring of foreign commerce. England was noted
for the manufacture of fine cloths made of Spanish wool more than
a century before any of those which now flourish in the places
above mentioned were fit for foreign sale. The extension and
improvement of these last could not take place but in consequence
of the extension and improvement of agriculture the last and
greatest effect of foreign commerce, and of the manufactures
immediately introduced by it, and which I shall now proceed to
explain.  

                            CHAPTER IV

How the Commerce of the Towns Contributed to the Improvement of
the Country

     THE increase and riches of commercial and manufacturing
towns contributed to the improvement and cultivation of the
countries to which they belonged in three different ways.
     First, by affording a great and ready market for the rude
produce of the country, they gave encouragement to its
cultivation and further improvement. This benefit was not even
confined to the countries in which they were situated, but
extended more or less to all those with which they had any
dealings. To all of them they afforded a market for some part
either of their rude or manufactured produce, and consequently
gave some encouragement to the industry and improvement of all.
Their own country, however, on account of its neighbourhood,
necessarily derived the greatest benefit from this market. Its
rude produce being charged with less carriage, the traders could
pay the growers a better price for it, and yet afford it as cheap
to the consumers as that of more distant countries.
     Secondly, the wealth acquired by the inhabitants of cities
was frequently employed in purchasing such lands as were to be
sold, of which a great part would frequently be uncultivated.
Merchants are commonly ambitious of becoming country gentlemen,
and when they do, they are generally the best of all improvers. A
merchant is accustomed to employ his money chiefly in profitable
projects, whereas a mere country gentleman is accustomed to
employ it chiefly in expense. The one often sees his money go
from him and return to him again with a profit; the other, when
once he parts with it, very seldom expects to see any more of it.
Those different habits naturally affect their temper and
disposition in every sort of business. A merchant is commonly a
bold, a country gentleman a timid undertaker. The one is not
afraid to lay out at once a large capital upon the improvement of
his land when he has a probable prospect of raising the value of
it in proportion to the expense. The other, if he has any
capital, which is not always the case, seldom ventures to employ
it in this manner. If he improves at all, it is commonly not with
a capital, but with what he can save out of his annual revenue.
Whoever has had the fortune to live in a mercantile town situated
in an unimproved country must have frequently observed how much
more spirited the operations of merchants were in this way than
those of mere country gentlemen. The habits, besides, of order,
economy, and attention, to which mercantile business naturally
forms a merchant, render him much fitter to execute, with profit
and success, any project of improvement.
     Thirdly, and lastly, commerce and manufactures gradually
introduced order and good government, and with them, the liberty
and security of individuals, among the inhabitants of the
country, who had before lived almost in a continual state of war
with their neighbours and of servile dependency upon their
superiors. This, though it has been the least observed, is by far
the most important of all their effects. Mr. Hume is the only
writer who, so far as I know, has hitherto taken notice of it.
     In a country which has neither foreign commerce, nor any of
the finer manufactures, a great proprietor, having nothing for
which he can exchange the greater part of the produce of his
lands which is over and above the maintenance of the cultivators,
consumes the whole in rustic hospitality at home. If this surplus
produce is sufficient to maintain a hundred or a thousand men, he
can make use of it in no other way than by maintaining a hundred
or a thousand men. He is at all times, therefore, surrounded with
a multitude of retainers and dependants, who, having no
equivalent to give in return for their maintenance, but being fed
entirely by his bounty, must obey him, for the same reason that
soldiers must obey the prince who pays them. Before the extension
of commerce and manufacture in Europe, the hospitality of the
rich, and the great, from the sovereign down to the smallest
baron, exceeded everything which in the present times we can
easily form a notion of. Westminster Hall was the dining-room of
William Rufus, and might frequently, perhaps, not be too large
for his company. It was reckoned a piece of magnificence in
Thomas Becket that he strewed the floor of his hall with clean
hay or rushes in the season, in order that the knights and
squires who could not get seats might not spoil their fine
clothes when they sat down on the floor to eat their dinner. The
great Earl of Warwick is said to have entertained every day at
his different manors thirty thousand people, and though the
number here may have been exaggerated, it must, however, have
been very great to admit of such exaggeration. A hospitality
nearly of the same kind was exercised not many years ago in many
different parts of the highlands of Scotland. It seems to be
common in all nations to whom commerce and manufactures are
little known. "I have seen," says Doctor Pocock, "an Arabian
chief dine in the streets of a town where he had come to sell his
cattle, and invite all passengers, even common beggars, to sit
down with him and partake of his banquet."
     The occupiers of land were in every respect as dependent
upon the great proprietor as his retainers. Even such of them as
were not in a state of villanage were tenants at will, who paid a
rent in no respect equivalent to the subsistence which the land
afforded them. A crown, half a crown, a sheep, a lamb, was some
years ago in the highlands of Scotland a common rent for lands
which maintained a family. In some places it is so at this day;
nor will money at present purchase a greater quantity of
commodities there than in other places. In a country where the
surplus produce of a large estate must be consumed upon the
estate itself, it will frequently be more convenient for the
proprietor that part of it be consumed at a distance from his own
house provided they who consume it are as dependent upon him as
either his retainers or his menial servants. He is thereby saved
from the embarrassment of either too large a company or too large
a family. A tenant at will, who possesses land sufficient to
maintain his family for little more than a quit-rent, is as
dependent upon the proprietor as any servant or retainer whatever
and must obey him with as little reserve. Such a proprietor, as
he feeds his servants and retainers at his own house, so he feeds
his tenants at their houses. The subsistence of both is derived
from his bounty, and its continuance depends upon his good
pleasure.
     Upon the authority which the great proprietor necessarily
had in such a state of things over their tenants and retainers
was founded the power of the ancient barons. They necessarily
became the judges in peace, and the leaders in war, of all who
dwelt upon their estates. They could maintain order and execute
the law within their respective demesnes, because each of them
could there turn the whole force of all the inhabitants against
the injustice of any one. No other persons had sufficient
authority to do this. The king in particular had not. In those
ancient times he was little more than the greatest proprietor in
his dominions, to whom, for the sake of common defence against
their common enemies, the other great proprietors paid certain
respects. To have enforced payment of a small debt within the
lands of a great proprietor, where all the inhabitants were armed
and accustomed to stand by one another, would have cost the king,
had he attempted it by his own authority, almost the same effort
as to extinguish a civil war. He was, therefore, obliged to
abandon the administration of justice through the greater part of
the country to those who were capable of administering it; and
for the same reason to leave the command of the country militia
to those whom that militia would obey.
     It is a mistake to imagine that those territorial
jurisdictions took their origin from the feudal law. Not only the
highest jurisdictions both civil and criminal, but the power of
levying troops, of coining money, and even that of making
bye-laws for the government of their own people, were all rights
possessed allodially by the great proprietors of land several
centuries before even the name of the feudal law was known in
Europe. The authority and jurisdiction of the Saxon lords in
England appear to have been as great before the Conquest as that
of any of the Norman lords after it. But the feudal law is not
supposed to have become the common law of England till after the
Conquest. That the most extensive authority and jurisdictions
were possessed by the great lords in France allodially long
before the feudal law was introduced into that country is a
matter of fact that admits of no doubt. That authority and those
jurisdictions all necessarily flowed from the state of property
and manners just now described. Without remounting to the remote
antiquities of either the French or English monarchies, we may
find in much later times many proofs that such effects must
always flow from such causes. It is not thirty years ago since
Mr. Cameron of Lochiel, a gentleman of Lochabar in Scotland,
without any legal warrant whatever, not being what was then
called a lord of regality, nor even a tenant in chief, but a
vassal of the Duke of Argyle, and without being so much as a
justice of peace, used, notwithstanding, to exercise the highest
criminal jurisdiction over his own people. He is said to have
done so with great equity, though without any of the formalities
of justice; and it is not improbable that the state of that part
of the country at that time made it necessary for him to assume
this authority in order to maintain the public peace. That
gentleman, whose rent never exceeded five hundred pounds a year,
carried, in 1745, eight hundred of his own people into the
rebellion with him.
     The introduction of the feudal law, so far from extending,
may be regarded as an attempt to moderate the authority of the
great allodial lords. It established a regular subordination,
accompanied with a long train of services and duties, from the
king down to the smallest proprietor. During the minority of the
proprietor, the rent, together with the management of his lands,
fell into the hands of his immediate superior, and, consequently,
those of all great proprietors into the hands of the king, who
was charged with the maintenance and education of the pupil, and
who, from his authority as guardian, was supposed to have a right
of disposing of him in marriage, provided it was in a manner not
unsuitable to his rank. But though this institution necessarily
tended to strengthen the authority of the king, and to weaken
that of the great proprietors, it could not do either
sufficiently for establishing order and good government among the
inhabitants of the country, because it could not alter
sufficiently that state of property and manners from which the
disorders arose. The authority of government still continued to
be, as before, too weak in the head and too strong in the
inferior members, and the excessive strength of the inferior
members was the cause of the weakness of the head. After the
institution of feudal subordination, the king was as incapable of
restraining the violence of the great lords as before. They still
continued to make war according to their own discretion, almost
continually upon one another, and very frequently upon the king;
and the open country still continued to be a scene of violence,
rapine, and disorder.
     But what all the violence of the feudal institutions could
never have effected, the silent and insensible operation of
foreign commerce and manufactures gradually brought about. These
gradually furnished the great proprietors with something for
which they could exchange the whole surplus produce of their
lands, and which they could consume themselves without sharing it
either with tenants or retainers. All for ourselves and nothing
for other people, seems, in every age of the world, to have been
the vile maxim of the masters of mankind. As soon, therefore, as
they could find a method of consuming the whole value of their
rents themselves, they had no disposition to share them with any
other persons. For a pair of diamond buckles, perhaps, or for
something as frivolous and useless, they exchanged the
maintenance, or what is the same thing, the price of the
maintenance of a thousand men for a year, and with it the whole
weight and authority which it could give them. The buckles,
however, were to be all their own, and no other human creature
was to have any share of them; whereas in the more ancient method
of expense they must have shared with at least a thousand people.
With the judges that were to determine the preference this
difference was perfectly decisive; and thus, for the
gratification of the most childish, the meanest, and the most
sordid of all vanities, they gradually bartered their whole power
and authority.
     In a country where there is no foreign commerce, nor any of
the finer manufactures, a man of ten thousand a year cannot well
employ his revenue in any other way than in maintaining, perhaps,
a thousand families, who are all of them necessarily at his
command. In the present state of Europe, a man of ten thousand a
year can spend his whole revenue, and he generally does so,
without directly maintaining twenty people, or being able to
command more than ten footmen not worth the commanding.
Indirectly, perhaps, he maintains as great or even a greater
number of people than he could have done by the ancient method of
expense. For though the quantity of precious productions for
which he exchanges his whole revenue be very small, the number of
workmen employed in collecting and preparing it must necessarily
have been very great. Its great price generally arises from the
wages of their labour, and the profits of all their immediate
employers. By paying that price he indirectly pays all those
wages and profits and thus indirectly contributes to the
maintenance of all the workmen and their employers. He generally
contributes, however, but a very small proportion to that of
each, to very few perhaps a tenth, to many not a hundredth, and
to some not a thousandth, nor even a ten-thousandth part of their
whole annual maintenance. Though he contributes, therefore, to
the maintenance of them all, they are all more or less
independent of him, because generally they can all be maintained
without him.
     When the great proprietors of land spend their rents in
maintaining their tenants and retainers, each of them maintains
entirely all his own tenants and all his own retainers. But when
they spend them in maintaining tradesmen and artificers, they
may, all of them taken together, perhaps, maintain as great, or,
on account of the waste which attends rustic hospitality, a
greater number of people than before. Each of them, however,
taken singly, contributes often but a very small share to the
maintenance of any individual of this greater number. Each
tradesman or artificer derives his subsistence from the
employment, not of one, but of a hundred or a thousand different
customers. Though in some measure obliged to them all, therefore,
he is not absolutely dependent upon any one of them.
     The personal expense of the great proprietors having in this
manner gradually increased, it was impossible that the number of
their retainers should not as gradually diminish till they were
at last dismissed altogether. The same cause gradually led them
to dismiss the unnecessary part of their tenants. Farms were
enlarged, and the occupiers of land, notwithstanding the
complaints of depopulation, reduced to the number necessary for
cultivating it, according to the imperfect state of cultivation
and improvement in those times. By the removal of the unnecessary
mouths, and by exacting from the farmer the full value of the
farm, a greater surplus, or what is the same thing, the price of
a greater surplus, was obtained for the proprietor, which the
merchants and manufacturers soon furnished him with a method of
spending upon his own person in the same manner as he had done
the rest. The same cause continuing to operate, he was desirous
to raise his rents above what his lands, in the actual state of
their improvement, could afford. His tenants could agree to this
upon one condition only, that they should be secured in their
possession for such a term of years as might give them time to
recover with profit whatever they should lay out in the further
improvement of the land. The expensive vanity of the landlord
made him willing to accept of this condition; and hence the
origin of long leases.
     Even a tenant at will, who pays the full value of the land,
is not altogether dependent upon the landlord. The pecuniary
advantages which they receive from one another are mutual and
equal, and such a tenant will expose neither his life nor his
fortune in the service of the proprietor. But if he has a lease
for a long term of years, he is altogether independent; and his
landlord must not expect from him the most trifling service
beyond what is either expressly stipulated in the lease or
imposed upon him by the common and known law of the country.
     The tenants having in this manner become independent, and
the retainers being dismissed, the great proprietors were no
longer capable of interrupting the regular execution of justice
or of disturbing the peace of the country. Having sold their
birthright, not like Esau for a mess of pottage in time of hunger
and necessity, but in the wantonness of plenty, for trinkets and
baubles, fitter to be the playthings of children than the serious
pursuits of men, they became as insignificant as any substantial
burgher or tradesman in a city. A regular government was
established in the country as well as in the city, nobody having
sufficient power to disturb its operations in the one any more
than in the other.
     It does not, perhaps, relate to the present subject, but I
cannot help remarking it, that very old families, such as have
possessed some considerable estate from father to son for many
successive generations are very rare in commercial countries. In
countries which have little commerce, on the contrary, such as
Wales or the highlands of Scotland, they are very common. The
Arabian histories seem to be all full of genealogies, and there
is a history written by a Tartar Khan, which has been translated
into several European languages, and which contains scarce
anything else; a proof that ancient families are very common
among those nations. In countries where a rich man can spend his
revenue in no other way than by maintaining as many people as it
can maintain, he is not apt to run out, and his benevolence it
seems is seldom so violent as to attempt to maintain more than he
can afford. But where he can spend the greatest revenue upon his
own person, he frequently has no bounds to his expense, because
he frequently has no bounds to his vanity or to his affection for
his own person. In commercial countries, therefore, riches, in
spite of the most violent regulations of law to prevent their
dissipation, very seldom remain long in the same family. Among
simple nations, on the contrary, they frequently do without any
regulations of law, for among nations of shepherds, such as the
Tartars and Arabs, the consumable nature of their property
necessarily renders all such regulations impossible.
     A revolution of the greatest importance to the public
happiness was in this manner brought about by two different
orders of people who had not the least intention to serve the
public. To gratify the most childish vanity was the sole motive
of the great proprietors. The merchants and artificers, much less
ridiculous, acted merely from a view to their own interest, and
in pursuit of their own pedlar principle of turning a penny
wherever a penny was to be got. Neither of them had either
knowledge or foresight of that great revolution which the folly
of the one, and the industry of the other, was gradually bringing
about.
     It is thus that through the greater part of Europe the
commerce and manufactures of cities, instead of being the effect,
have been the cause and occasion of the improvement and
cultivation of the country.
     This order, however, being contrary to the natural course of
things, is necessarily both slow and uncertain. Compare the slow
progress of those European countries of which the wealth depends
very much upon their commerce and manufactures with the rapid
advances of our North American colonies, of which the wealth is
founded altogether in agriculture. Through the greater part of
Europe the number of inhabitants is not supposed to double in
less than five hundred years. In several of our North American
colonies, it is found to double in twenty or five-and-twenty
years. In Europe, the law of primogeniture and perpetuities of
different kinds prevent the division of great estates, and
thereby hinder the multiplication of small proprietors. A small
proprietor, however, who knows every part of his little
territory, who views it with all the affection which property,
especially small property, naturally inspires, and who upon that
account takes pleasure not only in cultivating but in adorning
it, is generally of all improvers the most industrious, the most
intelligent, and the most successful. The same regulations,
besides, keep so much land out of the market that there are
always more capitals to buy than there is land to sell, so that
what is sold always sells at a monopoly price. The rent never
pays the interest of the purchase-money, and is, besides,
burdened with repairs and other occasional charges to which the
interest of money is not liable. To purchase land is everywhere
in Europe a most unprofitable employment of a small capital. For
the sake of the superior security, indeed, a man of moderate
circumstances, when he retires from business, will sometimes
choose to lay out his little capital in land. A man of profession
too, whose revenue is derived from. another source, often loves
to secure his savings in the same way. But a young man, who,
instead of applying to trade or to some profession, should employ
a capital of two or three thousand pounds in the purchase and
cultivation of a small piece of land, might indeed expect to live
very happily, and very independently, but must bid adieu forever
to all hope of either great fortune or great illustration, which
by a different employment of his stock he might have had the same
chance of acquiring with other people. Such a person too, though
he cannot aspire at being a proprietor, will often disdain to be
a farmer. The small quantity of land, therefore, which is brought
to market, and the high price of what is brought thither,
prevents a great number of capitals from being employed in its
cultivation and improvement which would otherwise have taken that
direction. In North America, on the contrary, fifty or sixty
pounds is often found a sufficient stock to begin a plantation
with. The purchase and improvement of uncultivated land is there
the most profitable employment of the smallest as well as of the
greatest capitals, and the most direct road to all the fortune
and illustration which can be acquired in that country. Such
land, indeed, is in North America to be had almost for nothing,
or at a price much below the value of the natural produce- a
thing impossible in Europe, or, indeed, in any country where all
lands have long been private property. If landed estates,
however, were divided equally among all the children upon the
death of any proprietor who left a numerous family, the estate
would generally be sold. So much land would come to market that
it could no longer sell at a monopoly price. The free rent of the
land would go nearer to pay the interest of the purchase-money,
and a small capital might be employed in purchasing land as
profitably as in any other way.
     England, on account of the natural fertility of the soil, of
the great extent of the sea-coast in proportion to that of the
whole country, and of the many navigable rivers which run through
it and afford the conveniency of water carriage to some of the
most inland parts of it, is perhaps as well fitted by nature as
any large country in Europe to be the seat of foreign commerce,
of manufactures for distant sale, and of all the improvements
which these can occasion. From the beginning of the reign of
Elizabeth too, the English legislature has been peculiarly
attentive to the interests of commerce and manufactures, and in
reality there is no country in Europe, Holland itself not
excepted, of which the law is, upon the whole, more favourable to
this sort of industry. Commerce and manufactures have accordingly
been continually advancing during all this period. The
cultivation and improvement of the country has, no doubt, been
gradually advancing too; but it seems to have followed slowly,
and at a distance, the more rapid progress of commerce and
manufactures. The greater part of the country must probably have
been cultivated before the reign of Elizabeth; and a very great
part of it still remains uncultivated, and the cultivation of the
far greater part much inferior to what it might be. The law of
England, however, favours agriculture not only indirectly by the
protection of commerce, but by several direct encouragements.
Except in times of scarcity, the exportation of corn is not only
free, but encouraged by a bounty. In times of moderate plenty,
the importation of foreign corn is loaded with duties that amount
to a prohibition. The importation of live cattle, except from
Ireland, is prohibited at all times, and it is but of late that
it was permitted from thence. Those who cultivate the land,
therefore, have a monopoly against their countrymen for the two
greatest and most important articles of land produce, bread and
butcher's meat. These encouragements, though at bottom, perhaps,
as I shall endeavour to show hereafter, altogether illusory,
sufficiently demonstrate at least the good intention of the
legislature to favour agriculture. But what is of much more
importance than all of them, the yeomanry of England are rendered
as secure, as independent, and as respectable as law can make
them. No country, therefore, in which the right of primogeniture
takes place, which pays tithes, and where perpetuities, though
contrary to the spirit of the law, are admitted in some cases,
can give more encouragement to agriculture than England. Such,
however, notwithstanding, is the state of its cultivation. What
would it have been had the law given no direct encouragement to
agriculture besides what arises indirectly from the progress of
commerce, and had left the yeomanry in the same condition as in
most other countries of Europe? It is now more than two hundred
years since the beginning of the reign of Elizabeth, a period as
long as the course of human prosperity usually endures.
     France seems to have had a considerable share of foreign
commerce near a century before England was distinguished as a
commercial country. The marine of France was considerable,
according to the notions of the times, before the expedition of
Charles VIII to Naples. The cultivation and improvement of
France, however, is, upon the whole, inferior to that of England.
The law of the country has never given the same direct
encouragement to agriculture.
     The foreign commerce of Spain and Portugal to the other
parts of Europe, though chiefly carried on in foreign ships, is
very considerable. That to their colonies is carried on in their
own, and is much greater, on account of the great riches and
extent of those colonies. But it has never introduced any
considerable manufactures for distant sale into either of those
countries, and the greater part of both still remains
uncultivated. The foreign commerce of Portugal is of older
standing than that of any great country in Europe, except Italy.
     Italy is the only great country of Europe which seems to
have been cultivated and improved in every part by means of
foreign commerce and manufactures for distant sale. Before the
invasion of Charles VIII, Italy according to Guicciardin, was
cultivated not less in the most mountainous and barren parts of
the country than in the plainest and most fertile. The
advantageous situation of the country, and the great number of
independent states which at that time subsisted in it, probably
contributed not a little to this general cultivation. It is not
impossible too, notwithstanding this general expression of one of
the most judicious and reserved of modern historians, that Italy
was not at that time better cultivated than England is at
present.
     The capital, however, that is acquired to any country by
commerce and manufactures is all a very precarious and uncertain
possession till some part of it has been secured and realized in
the cultivation and improvement of its lands. A merchant, it has
been said very properly, is not necessarily the citizen of any
particular country. It is in a great measure indifferent to him
from what place he carries on his trade; and a very trifling
disgust will make him remove his capital, and together with it
all the industry which it supports, from one country to another.
No part of it can be said to belong to any particular country,
till it has been spread as it were over the face of that country,
either in buildings or in the lasting improvement of lands. No
vestige now remains of the great wealth said to have been
possessed by the greater part of the Hans towns except in the
obscure histories of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. It
is even uncertain where some of them were situated or to what
towns in Europe the Latin names given to some of them belong. But
though the misfortunes of Italy in the end of the fifteenth and
beginning of the sixteenth centuries greatly diminished the
commerce and manufactures of the cities of Lombardy and Tuscany,
those countries still continue to be among the most populous and
best cultivated in Europe. The civil wars of Flanders, and the
Spanish government which succeeded them, chased away the great
commerce of Antwerp, Ghent, and Bruges. But Flanders still
continues to be one of the richest, best cultivated, and most
populous provinces of Europe. The ordinary revolutions of war and
government easily dry up the sources of that wealth which arises
from commerce only. That which arises from the more solid
improvements of agriculture is much more durable and cannot be
destroyed but by those more violent convulsions occasioned by the
depredations of hostile and barbarous nations continued for a
century or two together, such as those that happened for some
time before and after the fall of the Roman empire in the western
provinces of Europe.

 